# Ridelister
"*Ridelister*" is my submission for the HopSkipDrive rails assessment. It is a Rails 7 application (using Ruby 3.2.2) serving a RESTful API endpoint that returns a paginated JSON list of rides in descending score order for a given driver. Score is determined by this equation:
```
score (dollars per hour) = (ride earnings) / (commute duration + ride duration)
```
Where (based on Google's Directions API):
- The driving distance between two addresses is the distance in miles that it would take to drive a reasonably efficient route between them.
- The driving duration between two addresses is the amount of time in hours it would take to drive the driving distance under realistic driving conditions.
- The commute distance for a ride is the driving distance from the driver’s home address to the start of the ride, in miles.
- The commute duration for a ride is the amount of time it is expected to take to drive the commute distance, in hours.
- The ride distance for a ride is the driving distance from the start address of the ride to the destination address, in miles
- The ride duration for a ride is the amount of time it is expected to take to drive the ride distance, in hours
- The ride earnings is how much the driver earns by driving the ride. It takes into account both the amount of time the ride is expected to take and the distance. For the purposes of this exercise, it is calculated as: $12 + $1.50 per mile beyond 5 miles + (ride duration) * $0.70 per minute beyond 15 minutes

The application has two models:

#### `Ride`
- `id`
- `start_address`
- `destination_address`
- `start_latitude`
- `start_longitude`

The start and destination addresses are strings that can be interpreted by Google's Directions API. Start latitude/longitude are generated by the `geocoder` gem, and are used to find rides that begin close to the driver's home address.

#### `Driver`
- `id`
- `home_address`

Similar to the addresses in the Ride model, the driver's home address is a string that can be interpreted by Google's Directions API.

### Some notes about design

- Google's Directions API is expensive. The design choice to use the geocoder gem (which should be discussed) pre-sorts the "best" rides, limiting the number of external and costly requests to the Google Directions API.
- The rides table can get big, especially if we're not sharding the data based on geolocation. The geocoder gem can help us for this too, but indexing will stress the database on ride creations, so if we're getting a lot of writes, we should also shard.
- The default behavior of the search also assumes rides starting near the driver's home address should be considered first. This was another design choice I made working with a small dataset of rides. This approach should be discussed and, driven by real world use cases, likely be revisited for optimization.
- I'm caching the response data I care about from the Google Directions API. Caching the responses cuts down on how many calls we need to make to provide a "good" score for the rides. This is a simple cache,  with more historical data about traffic (at least), we might want to alter. It does help cut down on the calls to the service. I have it set to one minute because it's useful in the development phase for the cache to expire quickly.
- The geocoder `.near()` method takes some time, we should also consider caching its response. We'd want to break the cache if a new ride was created that might be relevant to this Driver, but this is more logic than I had time to implement :beers:.
- You will see many `TODO`s and `NOTE`s. For the purpose of this exercise, these are points of discussion or highlighted areas where I would have spent more time (given more time). Related to this point, many test have been added, but there are more tests (e.g., when is the cache used or not?) that could be written given more time.

## Prerequisites

- Ruby 3+
- Rails 7
- MySQL 5.7+

Ridelister is dependent on the [Google Directions API](https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/directions/overview), and a valid environment variable (`GOOGLE_DIRECTIONS_API_KEY`) must be present to make requests to their API.

## Build
1. Clone the repository
2. Run `bundle install`.
4. **Set up the database:** Note: you may need to adjust your environment variables/credentials in config/database.yml.
   1. Run the command `rails db:create` to create the database,
   1. Run the command `rails db:migrate` to run the migrations and set up the database schema.
   1. Run the command `rails db:seed` to add some development data (rides and drivers)

## Running the Application
Start the Rails server with `rails server`. The application will be available at `http://localhost:3000`.

Documentation for the API is in the [API.md file](API.md).
### tl;dr example:
``` bash
$ curl "http://localhost:3000/api/v1/rides?driver_id=1" | jq
```
### response:
```json
{
  "driver_address": "111 SW 5th Ave, Portland, OR 97204",
  "rides": [
    {
      "id": 11,
      "start_address": "1005 W Burnside St, Portland, OR 97209",
      "destination_address": "1 N Center Ct St, Portland, OR 97227",
      "score": 1.25,
      "distance": 2.7961695,
      "duration": 6.3,
      "commute_distance": 0.505795994,
      "commute_duration": 3.316666666666667
    },
    // ... more rides ...
  ],
  "total_pages": 20
}
```

## Test

The tests for Ridelister can be run using Rspec:

``` bash
$ rspec
```
